How likely is flu-related pneumonia to happen to you? What are the symptoms to look out for when they can be similar to those of a cold or flu? And when should you immediately head to the A&E department?
(Photo: iStock/visualspace)

       This audio is generated by an AI tool.
    
What causes influenza to progress to pneumonia? That’s a question many healthy adults don’t ask because you can usually count on your immune system to defeat the flu virus. 
Yes, you’ll have to endure about five to seven days of sore throat, a runny or stuffy nose, fever, headaches, muscle aches and/or body chills to recover. But you’ll be no worse for wear once you do. 
Flu can progress to pneumonia in two ways, said Dr Valencia Lim, a consultant with National University Hospital’s Department of Medicine, Division of Respiratory And Critical Care Medicine. One, the flu virus can advance from your upper respiratory tract to your lungs, causing viral pneumonia, she said. 
Two, “viral infections (such as the flu) damage the airways and weaken your immune system, increasing your susceptibility to bacterial infections”, said Dr Lim, adding that such secondary bacterial infection can occur in up to 20 per cent of individuals with influenza.
“Basically, if your immune system is already weakened, maybe you're stressed, not sleeping well, or have other health issues, it's more likely that the flu could progress to pneumonia,” said Dr Andrew Fang, a family physician with Doctor Anywhere.
For a relatively healthy adult, he said, it could take a few days to a week for pneumonia symptoms to develop.
Despite its high occurrence, “pneumonia is not always fatal”, said Dr Lim. “In severe cases where hospitalisation is required, mortality can be up to 20 per cent. Cases that require ICU care have a higher mortality of up to 40 per cent.”
“While this scenario is less common, a cold (which is also caused by a virus) can sometimes progress to pneumonia,” said Dr Fang. “A cold is a milder infection compared to the flu, but it can still weaken your defences. Sometimes, other bacteria present might also take advantage of the weakened state and infect the lungs.”
That’s the reason why individuals with a weakened immune system, such as those on immunosuppressive medications, as well as patients with chronic medical conditions such as heart disease and kidney disease are vulnerable to pneumonia, said Dr Lim.
“Pneumonia can mimic a cold or flu with cough, fever and body aches,” said Dr Fang, who advised looking out for pneumonia through the following symptoms. If you have one or more of them, see a general practitioner as soon as possible, he said.
Dr Lim advised to head to the hospital for further evaluation if you are experiencing shortness of breath, chest pain, low oxygen saturation or your condition is not improving even after antibiotic use. 
Not always, said both Dr Lim and Dr Fang. Mild cases may be treated with antibiotics (if the cause is bacterial) and rest. 
“Hospitalisation is usually warranted in patients with other underlying health conditions as pneumonia can potentially worsen in these individuals,” said Dr Lim. You may also be admitted “if you have severe symptoms like difficulty breathing or a high fever”, said Dr Fang. 
In the hospital, you’re likely to undergo tests such as a chest X-ray or blood tests to confirm pneumonia. Other tests may include viral swabs, respiratory cultures and molecular tests for bacteria, said Dr Lim. Treatment typically involves intravenous antibiotics. 
“It takes about four to six weeks for individuals to feel completely well and for any chest X-rays to show resolution,” she said. “In healthy individuals who recover from an episode of pneumonia, they are not more susceptible to future infections.”
"Pneumonia itself isn’t contagious but the bacteria and viruses that cause it are," said Dr Andrew Lee, a family physician and associate consultant with National Healthcare Group Polyclinics. So "preventing the flu is a good way to reduce the risk of pneumonia", he said.
Personal hygiene measures such as washing your hands, using an alcohol-based hand sanitiser, and wearing a mask in crowded places can help to protect you. But the best way to protect yourself from catching the sniffles is to get up-to-date with your flu shots, said the doctors. 
If you catch the flu while overseas, seek medical attention promptly, said Dr Fang, especially if you have a medical history. “Early treatment with antivirals can shorten the course and severity of the flu,” said Dr Lim. Doing so may also minimise the odds of the flu progressing to lung infection, he said. 
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.
To continue, upgrade to a supported browser or, for the finest experience, download the mobile app.